Brainy where it goes.
And I looked at it and I said, Jay, where the doors aren't opening and closing, and they're locking people in or locking people out.
Well, you had a 36-year-old architect who had never done a library before.
And of course, the British Library is just wonderful, on the other hand.
It had been poked at for 30 years.
Right.
But, uh, I'll deal with that.
National libraries, academic libraries, public libraries.
Um, you know, I've spent, uh... So, have you mixed, uh, my good friend Alexander Vatomare in here?
No.
Who is that?
I'll copy something for you.
Nicholas, I guess, Nicholas Alexander Vatomare, V-A-T-T-E-M-A-R-E, was a French ventriloquist.
And he's the man that I really credit with founding the Public Library movement.
I didn't know who he is, yes, okay.
We've had an interesting little correspondence lately with the National Library in France, because we credit him with really being one of the instigators in the founding of the Boston Public Library.
And the first books actually donated to the Boston Public Library were books that he assembled.
And we still have the Vadimir collection.
I always thought it was Tickner and those guys from Harvard.
Well, they were the people who Vadimir assembled to begin with to sell his idea of the exchange of books.
And they began to build on that idea.
But he was really the seed.
So it was a European, actually.
Yeah, in a way it was.
But, you know, it was interesting because he saw this as an idea that was American.
Interesting.
I mean, it wasn't an idea that he planted in France.
Are there some good references on him?
Yeah, there are, actually.
Nancy Quinn, who you need to talk to.
You know John Cole?
Oh, of course.
Well, Nancy Quinn is his wife.
She runs the Smithsonian Libraries.
She's done a lot of research on Vadamar, and his papers actually, I think, are at the New York Public Library.
We have an oil painting out just hanging out here where you were sitting, which was presented to Vadamar in 1839, I think, during really the period of his intense interest in this whole library movement, this whole exchange of books idea here in this part of the world.
I thought I would start this chapter, and I haven't started writing it yet.
I've spent a week in San Francisco, of course, and I think I have an excellent talk to everybody.
Talk to Ken.
And I had a terrific interview with him, actually.
Terrific in terms of, I think, what I was able to get out of him.
You know, I don't have an agenda.
I'm a journalist.
I certainly have a point of view.
But I have to say, that morning, I thought I would start this chapter, actually, on that day that you were observing your 150th anniversary.
This is really the way a big city should do it.
Got that old, beautiful building there.
Got this building here.
We have a community that, I mean, this is an institution as much as the BSO and the Red Sox and the MFA.
And that's not kidding.
That's a fact.
And I don't have to go down the list.
I know it.
But also, you had that flood.
I came here, I arrived, you know, and I saw people really who needed counseling who were working feverishly frantically to save their books.
That's right.
Flash to California, the 1989 earthquake.
Quote, I asked Ken Dolly, did you say that the 1989 earthquake was an opportunity to clean the Aegean stables?
you know, basically comparing books on the floor with what we know is horseshit in the stable.
And he said, well, that quote wasn't original with me.
I said, well, I know it.
I know the problem.
And he said it, you know.
And then he went on to defend that.
Give me your attitude on that.
Well, it's interesting, because I, you know, because
you sort of know the connection between Ken and me.
I'd be coy if I were to tell you I'm not going to ask you about it.
And so this is a good, I guess, segue your beginning point to that.
When I got to the Pikes Peak Library District, which Ken had run for, I don't know, maybe a dozen years or so, I found a library that had a grand reputation for its technology
but not actually as much application as I had hoped to find.
I also found a library serving a major urban city, major urban center, so deficient in its collections of materials that even the grandest of technology couldn't make up for the very lack of substance to a library.
We were able to build a collection from a half a million items to over a million items, I think in six or seven years' time.
I mean, a phenomenal amount of work.
Had he reduced?
I'm sorry, go ahead.
To bring up what I saw as a major deficiency.
I think what he had done for many years was use resources that I thought
And obviously, we would disagree about this if you were here talking with us.
I thought those resources should have been more effectively divided between investing in the new technologies, which I think have an important place in libraries, but maintaining this important and relevant perspective around books and library materials.
I think in this sort of hell-bent lunge forward,
He had sacrificed what is the stock and trade, this enormously important human connection between people and books, between an individual book and an individual person, which I think is still at the very core of what a library is, any kind of library.
On Tuesday, I was at a speaker at a colloquium at Wayne State University.
And Toby Holtzman, who I'm sure you've talked to.
Toby's in my book.
Right, I know.
You just saw him in New York a couple weeks ago, as a matter of fact.
Why don't I shoot a couple pictures while we talk, and then I'll get you behind your desk.
You know, and I love Toby.
He's sick.
He'd really be very intense, though, can't he?
He's intense.
But, you know, the perspective in talking to him about this passion, this connection that individuals have with books,
is part of this connection that goes beyond the words on a page or the images that people see when they read.
This connection to the book as a cultural instrument, a tool.
People look at people who are carpenters and they see the hammer as the instrument of creation for a carpenter.
Well, a book is an instrument of creation also.
People are enriched by books.
It may be enriched by the computer experience as well, but there's nothing like this amazingly very special connection between humans and books.
I don't know what I'm... Even the youngest of kids, I mean even the youngest of children, make this bond.
It's fascinating.
I don't know what I'm calling this new book.
I played it a couple of times.
One, at the moment, is an ingenious cipher, which is what Archibald MacLeach called the book when he was a librarian, of course.
And it might be just a little too... I don't know.
I like it.
My editor thinks it doesn't tell anything.
It doesn't, yeah.
Some people probably wouldn't... It's not a gentleman.
Wouldn't connect to it.
But, you know, I like the... Anyway.
So, when you got to... And, by the way, I gave the keynote address at Jay Trenofsky's Colorado Springs...
book seminar this summer so I did have a chance to go see the library and this is a major which is great now which is great I mean we worked real hard at building the library we're going to talk about some little library out talking about a very large metropolitan area with universities and and we were able to establish that library as a very very important information point and cultural point for the community did the people express
their dissatisfaction of the library when you arrived there?
Oh, yes.
Did they feel like they were being shortchanged in terms of... The number of complaints that I received about the lack of books was simply overwhelming.
In terms of titles, in terms of breadth, in terms of... Everything.
Everything.
I remember the first dinner that I was a speaker at, I had an elderly man come up to me and he said, Mr. Margolis,
If you do nothing here, buy a few books.
If you do nothing else, buy a few books.
Had Dowling reduced the collections, or just not strengthened?
I think for the most part he neglected the collections.
And turned his attention to what the things were.
The resources were refocused on technology.
I think the thrust and expectation was that what a library was was a connection to information, which I see as a narrower purview than the world of knowledge and culture.
The technology did a fair job, but only a fair job, as an information tool and information resource.
Now, let me say, I don't plan to make this a tale of two cities.
Yeah, right.
Well, in some ways it is a tale.
In some ways it is.
And certainly my experience is sort of unique, because I came to Colorado Springs as a bookman.
I consider myself a bookman.
Why don't you expand?
I mean, I'm a librarian, but I'm a bookman.
I mean, I like books.
I collect books personally.
I'm passionate about books.
I mean, I have thousands of books.
I've been in Boston 20 months, and I finally have my library, my bookcases in, and I've been unpacking my books.
Hundreds of boxes of books that I've been sort of without.
They've been in boxes in the attic and the basement and other places.
Tell me a little bit about books.
And I, you know, my interest in books is very eclectic.
I collect everything from books about cowboys to the Shakers, the religious American religious movement.
I collect oddities of all sorts, you know, books on unusual subjects.
Where are you from?
I was born in Greenwich, Connecticut.
So you're from New Islander?
Yeah, a New Islander.
But I lived in Michigan.
I lived in Colorado.
She can give me a CV.
We don't have to go through all of that.
You know, my sense, my connection, you know, is that I have some appreciation for the artistic elements of a book, physical elements of a book, values of collecting, the relative things, and what's in Canubula, what's, you know, medieval, what's,
illuminated, what's fore-edge painting.
I appreciate the book in terms of its reality, in addition to its content, and how books change people's lives, how books influence the world.
The term I like to use is books make people rich.
And take that away in every context, whether it's a book that helps you invest in the stock market, or a book that enriches you spiritually, or a book that gives you a new skill or a talent or a new insight that helps you be more successful.
I don't think I'm going to take the cheap shot and put it in my book.
But I did interview Ken Dowland in his apartment, and I did glance at the books on the shelves.
And there were Reader's Digest condensed books there, just a point of fact.
Ken is not a bookman.
Ken is an information technologist, first and foremost.
And I think it's important when you look at libraries, particularly, and when you look at the world of books, to see that if there is any degradation that I see, and not only the Ken Dallans specifically, but the other Ken Dallans out there,
particularly in the library world, is that is a movement and a trend that is frightening to me.
Because I see, first of all, I see the need for balance.
With any new technologies, there's offsets.
And I don't see, you know, that you should be hell-bent to embrace a new technology and abandon the oldest technology around.
Now, this is pertinent, and it goes beyond the superficial.
I asked Gina Menoudry, who I interviewed before I interviewed, a nice woman, and then I interviewed Dallin, but she said this first, and it was corroborated by Dallin.
I said, do you see the San Francisco Public Library performing the function of a research-depth library?
And they both said no.
Now, we are sitting in one of the great research libraries, public libraries, public or whatever, in the world.
In the world, yes.
And I don't think the city of Boston would be very happy.
37.2 million items.
We are the practitioners.
If you said this is not a research library, you're probably going back to Pikes Peak.
That's right.
We are the practitioners of research library critical mass theory in its ultimate, I mean.
How do you respond to that?
And I don't mean for you to engage in a colloquy with people in San Francisco.
I respond to that, that we are blessed with a history, a 150-year history, of people being thoughtful and visionary in collecting a resource that is second to none.
I had David Hennington working on a project.
He's the former director of the Houston Public Library.
He was in a few weeks ago, and he got a tour of the building, and we stopped to talk, and he was overwhelmed.
He said, I had no idea you had all of this.
And I said, you know, David, the comparison is, if somebody walks into the Houston Public Library looking for a book on a particular subject, or books on a particular subject, they're likely to find in your library, and he's retired, but still referred to his library, they're liable to find maybe 25 books in the Houston Public Library on that subject.
If they come here and ask for the same subject, it'll be 25,000 books that we'll pull off the shelves for them.
This sort of critical mass, which I think is what makes us an amazing institution.
But let's take it to the next... The depth, the depth of our collections.
You see, because this drives to the heart of the role of the public library in the 21st century, or, you know, in the future, whatever,
A lot of people are saying maybe a public library's role is not to be a research facility.
And one of the reasons that they gave out there is that, listen, Berkeley has a wonderful collection, Stanford has a wonderful collection, whatever's out there.
But of course, and if people really need access to this material, they can get it.
And then our job is to do these things for the public.
And here we are, of course, with probably the greatest concentration of books in North America.
That's right.
Isn't that great?
And yet we still have the BPL saying, well, that's fine.
We're delighted that Harvard has this, and all these other places have this, and the Massachusetts Historical Society.
Well, I think there's some important distinctions.
But does the public library, in your view, I guess, maybe you could address yourself to that, have a role in the
Yeah, for the researcher.
It's a critical role.
You know, when we began... And not many public libraries also are in a position to do that either, I think.
That's right.
But our founders in 1848, if you read that first annual report of 1852 that lays out the four categories of things that we should buy, it's clear and very distinct that a critical role and one of the equalizing roles of a public library was to buy resources that no one could afford to buy.
It speaks to this research function.
It speaks to this repository function.
It speaks to the need to buy expensive, important, critical tools that help everybody and level the playing field.
So it doesn't matter if you're Josiah Quincy and can afford to buy anything, or Sally or Joe Slob, who just got off the boat.
Or if I'm Nick Basbings, who can afford to pay $275 for a six-month reading ticket at Widener.
Exactly.
that's the other distinction that is critical harvard is a private library boston university is a private institution boston college is a private institution this is the public institution we're not a university of california that's a public institution we don't have one we have university of massachusetts of boston is the closest that we come to that we also in this city have an interesting connection in my mind higher education is one of the four
leading businesses in our community, as a business generating money.
To have public infrastructure that supports that kind of economic vitality is important.
I think one of the reasons that Boston historically has become, and obviously it was a leading educational city even before the library got here, as Harvard goes back to 16,
38 or whatever.
The dating is 38.
Give or take.
Right.
But one of the reasons that more modern institutions happened, you know, MIT was just a couple blocks from here when it began.
Boston University actually began, I think, right in this corner.
I think one of the reasons that that enterprise developed with such significance in Boston is that we had a public research function.
We had public infrastructure to support those institutions, and we still do that today.
We have 68 institutions of higher learning in Boston.
And I think somebody told me now there's a new college opening.
Maybe it's 69 or 70.
Well, there's that Olin money.
Yes, yes.
And he's not going to have a library, by the way.
Well, even though many of these institutions have libraries, they can't have the richness of the kind of resource that we have.
And so this is public infrastructure, very much like we have a T, or we have roads, that serve to support that whole enterprise.
On the day that you observed your 150th, I don't know whether it was you or John Berry who said this, but one of you, it was one of you who said, if you look at the municipal budget, you look at the percentage of that that is earmarked for the public library, and then you factor in the number of people
benefit from the library.
It's got to be the best deal.
What is your percentage, by the way?
I have no idea.
How much do you get?
I mean, our total resource is about $35 million.
But we get it from different, you know.
You get two and a half million people a year that come in here, approximately.
Are you concerned that the demographics show that
You're not really reaching the 18 to 24 age proofs.
I'm concerned about the Benton study.
Actually, my colloquium speech at Wayne State this week was at the public library dead.
Did you have a text to that one?
No, I don't.
It's sort of a hodgepodge thing.
But, you know, I cite declining SAT scores.
I cite book sale figures.
I cite enormous
illiteracy issues that we have.
You know, I cite all that.
I cite, you know, some of the public perspectives, which have been challenged, some of the Benton Study stuff.
When was the Benton Study published?
In 96, I think.
I could probably find that on the internet or whatever.
Yeah, yeah.
My perspective is, I actually don't think we're losing people.
I think we're being forced to look at the world differently.
In Boston today, we speak 140 languages.
The Boston of 1848, while there were different language groups here, was nowhere near a world city in terms of its cultural diversity.
It was a bustling place.
There was the China trade, so there was Chinese.
There was certainly major immigration from almost all the key ports in Europe, so a lot of European influx.
Italian, Portuguese, certainly British, French, German, Polish migration.
But today, we have a different complexion to what our constituency is.
We're buying books now, I think, in about forty languages.
How much do you spend each year on acquisitions?
I think seven million.
Up, down, status quo?
It's about status quo, percentage-wise, but I think our target is to keep it at about 20%.
And we're always looking for more money for acquisition.
And what's your policy on deaccessions?
We do very little.
We keep almost everything.
And, of course, we have off-site storage, which confirms that.
I'll give you an example.
what we think is the largest collection of city directories in the world.
We have 50,000 city directories.
It's an invaluable resource.
Sure, they're out of date.
You know, people laugh.
I say, we have city directories.
That's why you started at Harvard, how important city directories are to it.
It's called research.
Spectacular tools.
It's interesting now, in our newspaper collections, as, say, in Bosnia,
Cultures are being destroyed.
I'm writing about that, by the way, in this book.
Where do people go to re-establish their culture?
We have newspapers that they don't have.
You have newspapers here.
I think so, yeah.
And are you making copies available to them?
You're working with Andreas over at Harvard on this?
I think there's been contact.
But it's interesting to see, because people don't see... You know, people don't see that what we do is capture all the evidence of culture.
You know, that role is important.
Our own culture, as well as this huge world, which is
Certainly shrinking.
But deaccessioning, you say that you do very little, but undoubtedly there must be some weeding and grooming.
Yeah, I think what happens generally is we weed from the branch collections.
Duplicates.
You know, the best sellers, where you end up with, you know, 50 or something that you don't need.
Most of those end up going into library book sales.
The friends of the library, the citywide friends, organize.
We throw very little out.
I mean, it has to be generally... Is that kind of an institutional thing?
Yeah, we are collectors.
We are professional collectors.
We believe in this.
We believe in... Actually, you know, going back to the 1852 report, there's a little interesting review there of these four categories I mentioned.
And one category, I've got to find it for you because it's worthy of a chuckle or two, but it's indeed...
It's an important practice because it speaks to the second category of books on page 16 that the library should be collecting.
The first category
is books that cannot be taken out of the library.
This is the expensive stuff and encyclopedias and things because of their rarity or costliness can't easily be replaced.
Second category, books that few persons will wish to read.
Excellent.
And why is this important?
Why would we buy something that few people want to read?
Because it not only documents a culture,
But because there may be no interest today doesn't speak to the potential interest that there may be 50 years or 100 or 150 years from now.
I have Ken Carpenter telling me that when he was at Cress, he would buy books, 18th century economics books, that were uncut, meaning they'd never been read.
That's right.
And he said, and I bought them, and not really caring whether they would be read for another 200 years.
That's not the point.
becomes part of, as you say, the critical mass of a great research collection that has to be there.
Exactly.
So we today have things that no one else has.
We have the ephemeral things.
We have the fly-by-night.
We just acquired a huge collection of the Haldim and Julius Little Blue books.
They were ephemeral.
There were thousands of them published, apparently.
I think our collection now has
5,000 of them, some of them written by important authors under pseudonyms, some of them important perspectives of the world, because they were like the supermarket little books.
I don't know how much time you've been, but there are two areas I really want to hit.
We have to talk about the flood, and you have to bring me up to date on that, and I want to press the feeling when you got the wood.
Totally outside of—it happened.
It was exterior.
And was there an Augean stable discussion?
Maybe this was an opportunity to get— You know, it's interesting here.
The discussion was quite the opposite.
Or was it general quarters to save?
Save as much as we could possibly save.
I mean, we sent 50,000 containers to be freeze dried.
Worried about what it's going to cost later.
Exactly.
And only actually worried later in terms of would the quality of the saving be adequate to support the kind of service that we're used to.
And there were unique things down there, weren't there?
Unique things.
Some of the patent things.
A lot of damage in our gifts area, which is we've built great collections because there's a wonderful tradition of donating books to the library.
I don't know how San Francisco feels about donating books.
My suspicion is they don't.
You don't want them?
But we love them.
Do you?
We love them.
Really?
Because, I mean, there can be a lot of bulk in there.
Of course.
But it's interesting.
Just a couple months ago, a person who handles our gifts came up and said, our goals, look what I found.
It was a land grant from John Adams.
Wow!
Sealed.
Stuck in a book.
In a box of gifts.
I mean, not only the sense of discovery that we have about that, and that's sort of my bookman part gets really revved up and excited about that, but this is how you systematically preserve and catalog your community's culture, your world culture.
Gifts inform us.
Gifts bring us things that
We miss that no one else wants to read.
The little red things, the more obscure things.
So can you give me a brief update on how we're dealing with the flood?
Where do you stand at this point?
I'm not sure why I paid it again.
Yeah, and maybe if we have time, we'll take a walk down there.
We expect the flood loss is the cost to be somewhere between $10 and $16 million.
And there has been an outpouring.
We've had a lot of support.
We've had some challenge grants.
We've had fundraising.
We've had, I mean, we put out a call because we needed plastic crates.
I know that.
You know, we had somebody call us.
I have two crates.
Can I bring them by?
But I think it's pertinent, I doubt.
We had a woman, an elderly woman come by, and we were closed, still closed, to the closest street door with a plastic crate.
She said, I want to help you.
This is an outpouring of support for collections.
Exactly.
Isn't it?
It is.
The building is sound.
The building is fine.
It is.
What we are concerned with here are the contents.
Exactly.
And it is kind of reassuring.
Enormous testimonial to people's interest in this whole activity of preserving even what they may not themselves ever use.
A patent from 1876.
That's right.
Who cares?
I mean, the argument could be made.
Right.
A lot of people care.
Well, actually, a lot of people not only care, but benefit from that information, from that resource.
It is kind of uplifting in a way.
And I'll tell you, to see your staff, to see these people, I mean, it was... Well, my people are great.
I mean, I was interviewed by BBC, and the guy said to me, well, why would people be concerned about this?
And I said, well, if you were a preacher and you lost the holy book, would you be upset?
If you were a pianist and your piano was destroyed, how would you feel?
If you were a carpenter and you lost your hammer, how would you feel?
I mean, these are the tools that we permit us to practice our professions.
What were the actual numbers?
Because I see a variety of numbers on books and microfilm.
I think right now about 3.3 million items.
But that includes individual fiche, you know, and film rolls and books and documents and so on.
Can you freeze by the fiche in the same manner?
We tried.
Some of the fiche in the film did not do as well.
And I suspect most of that
we will probably end up having to replace.
We had two sort of problems.
One was time, and the other was that there was so much silt and dirt that came up with the water that that just permeated everything.
And so you can dry it out, you can remove the water, but then you have a book that is dirty.
I mean, almost impregnated.
This freeze-dry process is amazing, though.
That's fascinating.
It is fascinating.
Just a visionary statement.
Your concept of what it takes to be a librarian now and in the future.
You're no longer just a custodian of books.
Well, for me, it's hard to speak because, I mean, obviously in my case, you know, a position like this,
I'm a manager, I'm an administrator, I'm sometimes a politician, I'm a salesman, I'm an orator, I'm a huckster, I'm a counselor, I'm a therapist, I'm a million different things, depending upon the day and the time, it seems.
You have to raise funds in the manner of saying that Paul Mclare does in New York.
Of course.
Of course, I'm out hustling all the time.
Paul says he has to raise a half a million bucks a week.
That's his nut.
You know, there are all those demands.
I like to think of myself, though, as someone who indeed embodies the principles of equal access and this idea that you get rich at the library.
This idea that it doesn't matter who you are, it doesn't matter the color of your skin, it doesn't matter your name, it doesn't matter the language you speak, the nation of your ancestry, it doesn't matter what kind of clothes you wear or the shoes on your feet, whether you're, you know, it doesn't matter any of that.
This is a place where you can come, our 26 branches, this building is where you can come and get rich.
This is a public library and not an academic library, and I'm mindful of that.
When I tell you that there's a new university opened in Florida, and the president, his original thought was to have a library no bigger than a telephone booth.
I mean, this is virtual you.
It scares me.
It scares you.
Yeah, it scares me.
First of all, I don't think that's likely to be very successful.
Then they went off and bought 100,000 books from Upsil and College in New Jersey, which is in my book.
Well, I tell this story when I was in Monroe, Michigan.
We had an annual book sale, books that were donated.
Actually, we became very entrepreneurial.
We got leftovers from other library book sales, things that other libraries couldn't sell.
We used to go and get truckloads from Ann Arbor or Lansing or other places and bring them in.
And a big, I don't know, six-bay garage, bookmobiles that we'd just fill the books.
We'd get publishers to donate stuff, and we had a lot of stuff.
And one book sale, and I was out there.
It was sort of an interest of mine as a way of raising money, and I had a lot of fun with it.
And we had a guy, and it was like a three or four day sale, and he came the first day, and he bought $100 worth of books and paid in cash.
He came back the next day.
Another hundred hours.
Came back the next day.
And this went on and we ended up extending the sale.
He'd come back like four days in a row, a hundred hours worth of books.
And each time I gave him a deal, you know, quote unquote, you know.
And I couldn't figure out, there was no rhyme, no reason that I could see what he was buying.
So I finally said to him, I said, you know, why don't you buy the whole thing?
Why don't you buy every man's left?
And he said, well, I'd consider doing that.
Let's talk about it.
And I said, well, what do you want all these for?
He was founding a new college, a Christian college, and the state required for accreditation a certain number of books in the library with certain imprint dates.
You had to have X number of books printed.
In the past 10 years.
Do you know the name of this college?
I don't know the name of it.
Where was it again?
It was in suburban Detroit.
About when?
This would have been probably 84... I've used this in another context.
84, 85.
So it ended up, so it ended up, it ended up that he bought everything.
And he brought the church buses...
And we loaded these boxes after boxes after boxes onto these church buses to take back for them to store for their new, quote, college.
So content was irrelevant to him.
Irrelevant.
And in a way it was sad.
In a huge way it's sad.
Because he's fooling the accreditation people.
Exactly.
It was a way.
And the irony that this was a religious institution.
But he was following the rules.
And obviously it helped us financially.
Which is why, you know, you look at ARL statistics, and people say numbers don't really matter, but look at Berkeley.
When the numbers start going down, and you have this extraordinary uprising going on, the numbers do better.
And for years, David Stamm told me, he said, you know, a lot of people for years were buying just bulk to spike their numbers in the first place.
So what they're getting rid of, and he's very honest about it, is the bulk.
But I'm skeptical about that.
I mean, I think somebody has to be thorough.
And the system right now is serendipitous.
It's amazing if you're a researcher, and I've researched things that I've been interested in, to go to the places where you think the best collections are and to find things that aren't there.
To find oddities.
An interesting experience, some years ago I had bought a painting.
It turned out to be a painting by a very well-known artist.
And the way it had been framed, the signature was covered.
And no one knew until I bought it and sort of took it apart.
It was a fairly well-known painter.
American?
American painter.
And it turned out that
This was, this had originally been produced as an illustration and was the first illustrated published piece by this painter, Maynard Dixon, western painter.
And I learned just sort of accidentally in reading something about him that I thought that this was, what I had was the piece that probably had been
printed in the first book that he illustrated.
I searched high and low to find the book.
Obscure book.
Found it in my own library.
You mean your home library?
Yeah.
Mike's Big Library District.
Had acquired this book in 1898 when it was published.
But many other libraries with important Western collections that I had queried
didn't have it.
That's a great story.
What was the title of the book?
Um, Tales of Sunland, I think is the name of it.
But, you know, it's interesting for me to see that as thorough as we are in library collection development, there are gaps everywhere.
Because it isn't a coordinated, disciplined,
collection approach among and across libraries.
So what's bulk somewhere may not be somewhere else.
You know, your trash, my treasure.
Oh, indeed.
That happens a lot.
And the stories are wonderful when you encounter them.
Yeah, you know, would I argue that the Boston Public Library should be buying every Reader's Digest condensed book?
No.
But somebody probably should.
And interestingly enough, as you all know, people collect them.
Amazingly enough.
People collect them.
At the same library book sales, I remember a man who had a notebook.
He had everyone listed.
And he'd come and he'd go through the piles.
He'd go through the piles looking for the ones he was missing.
So tell me, you were in New England there.
You traveled around?
I've probably spent half my life in Colorado.
Tell me, is there something about Boston and the book culture here that you could come and do?
I love it.
I love being in this library.
This is the cat's meow for a librarian, I think.
I mean, particularly for somebody who appreciates the kind of book and treasures.
I mean, because our treasures even go beyond books.
Our prints and print department are
I mean, the unusual things we have.
I mean, the gold medal that was presented to George Washington when he won the Battle of Dorchester Heights.
I mean, we have that in our collection.
I've held that in my hands.
I mean, if that doesn't give you sort of this amazing, you know, feeling.
You know, I did a panel this week on that C-SPAN has been around.
on on the book in the in the next century that are dead or alive no this is something that the associates did actually here in boston and i took one of i took a leaf from the gutenberg bible that we have in our collection to show people i mean we have these amazingly important treasures and certainly our task is how do we share those how do we and this is an area where maybe technology can help maybe technology can
give people some of the taste and feel and flavor.
The British Library has this turn-the-page thing that they're dealing with the Indus foreign gospels.
Interesting.
Because it is a book that nobody is ever going to be able to see at any age.
That's right, exactly.
As Umberto Eco told me, he said, if I, you know, one page a day of the Book of Tales... Are you going to quote his essay on... The page I wrote on him, I'm putting in the book.
I wrote a... I didn't interview you... Umberto Eco on his thing on a library.
He did an essay on a library?
I interviewed him last fall and I wrote a piece for Biblio, which was a really nice piece.
And that's going in the new book.
I did a piece with Maurice Sendak for Civilization.
That's going in.
It's going to be really... Crazy hodgepodge book like the other one, but book culture.
Yeah, important.
And how I sorted out a little sleight of hand in mirrors, maybe.
I'm losing my voice, and I know you're busy.
And I would like to take a couple more shots.
The beauty is you're close.
and I will transcribe this, and Boston is really, you know, it's wonderful, and it will play a major role in this new book, and so that's great.
Anything I missed?
Probably tons, but you know.
Something that you would particularly like me to walk away with, you know, the knowledge of anything that you think I should... I think...
But probably, you know, that at least I believe that books are alive and well.
It's very much part of what we do here at the Boston Public Library.
Can I get a couple shots behind the desk?
Sure, sure.
And I have this.
You gave this to me already.
My book lamp?
Yeah.
And did you, did I get some of those?
I could do a whole section in your book about library book sales.
I love them.
This is a library book sales story.
Friends of the Library at Pikes Peak actually had been two annual book sales.
And after one sale, they had so much material left that they didn't have a clue of what to do with it.
And so they came to me and said, you know, Bernie, we'll get you the CD when that's done, and here's
And the propaganda.
They came to me and said, well, what do you think we should do?
I said, well, I don't really know.
I think we should probably have a contest or something.
And they did have some kind of contest.
And the end result was they had a suggestion that they should make furniture out of the books.
So a guy by the name of Chuck Robinoff, who was a book, actually a book, a rare bookseller and an engineer, decided, well,
A lamp.
I think $150 later, not counting his labor, this is the lamp that he produced.
I love how to get pregnant.
Right.
They produced this, and they figured out that there was absolutely no economic utility to trying to produce these lamps.
with the amount of money that he had to invest in the lampshade and the wiring and the base and all the other material, that there's no way.
So they presented this to me and they put a plaque on it as a gift of thanks to me as being a friend of the friend of the libraries.
And he teased me because he said now, and I know this really wasn't quite true, but that they picked out the books with me specifically in there.
So one of them is, I think, seeking spiritual direction and how to get pregnant and how to more effective meetings or something.
And, of course, I cackle when I... So it's something that I've had as part of my office since that presentation quite a few years ago, actually.
I want you to use it for...
I came back with 500 pictures.
Uh-oh.
And how many are good?
You know, a couple in each room.
I started looking for them.
You know, I had one spectacular picture of a pretty old library.
You know, that's the one.
Only one is one.
20 pictures, that's more.
You going to the book fair?
Yeah.
Can I not?
I don't know if I'll go tonight.
I always like to go on the first day, but I'm not actively collecting these days.
What I do is support my research.
I'm not actively collecting, but I'm just buying books.
Well, I spent a fortune on it.